PI World 2020 Lab
PI System: From Data Exploration to Notification

OSIsoft, LLC
1600 Alvarado Street
San Leandro, CA 94577
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of OSIsoft, LLC.
OSIsoft, the OSIsoft logo and logotype, Managed PI, OSIsoft Advanced Services,
OSIsoft Cloud Services, OSIsoft Connected Services, OSIsoft EDS, PI ACE, PI
Advanced Computing Engine, PI AF SDK, PI API, PI Asset Framework, PI Audit Viewer,
PI Builder, PI Cloud Connect, PI Connectors, PI Data Archive, PI DataLink, PI DataLink
Server, PI Developers Club, PI Integrator for Business Analytics, PI Interfaces, PI JDBC
Driver, PI Manual Logger, PI Notifications, PI ODBC Driver, PI OLEDB Enterprise, PI
OLEDB Provider, PI OPC DA Server, PI OPC HDA Server, PI ProcessBook, PI SDK, PI
Server, PI Square, PI System, PI System Access, PI Vision, PI Visualization Suite, PI
Web API, PI WebParts, PI Web Services, RLINK and RtReports are all trademarks of
OSIsoft, LLC.
All other trademarks or trade names used herein are the property of their respective
owners.
U.S. GOVERNMENT RIGHTS
Use, duplication or disclosure by the US Government is subject to restrictions set forth
in the OSIsoft, LLC license agreement and/or as provided in DFARS 227.7202, DFARS
252.227-7013, FAR 12-212, FAR 52.227-19, or their successors, as applicable.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the written permission of OSIsoft, LLC.

2|Page

Table of Contents
Contents
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................................... 3
PI System software........................................................................................................................................ 4
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Lab Overview......................................................................................................................................... 5
1.1

Objective ....................................................................................................................................... 5

1.2

Gathering Domain Knowledge – PI Vision .................................................................................... 5

1.3

Process Improvement Idea – PI Vision .......................................................................................... 7

Exploration and Data Engineering ...................................................................................................... 11
2.1

Objective ..................................................................................................................................... 11

2.2

Define and Label Dryer Operating States – Asset Analytics ........................................................ 11

2.3

Calculate Dryer Utilization Metrics – Asset Analytics ................................................................. 21

Contextualization and Data Preparation............................................................................................. 23
3.1

Objective ..................................................................................................................................... 23

3.2

Prepare Dryer Regeneration Features - Event Frame Template................................................. 23

3.3

Generate Regeneration Data for Analysis - Event Frames .......................................................... 27

Data Analysis and Qualification .......................................................................................................... 30
4.1

Objectives.................................................................................................................................... 30

4.2

Problem Assessment – PI integrator for Business Analytics and Power BI................................. 30

4.3

Model Development – PI DataLink ............................................................................................. 41

Operationalization and Notification ................................................................................................... 47
5.1

Objective ..................................................................................................................................... 47

5.2

Forecast Deployment – AF Analytics........................................................................................... 47

5.3

Proactive Solution – PI Notifications........................................................................................... 51

Summary ............................................................................................................................................. 57
6.1

7.

Revisit Learning Objectives ......................................................................................................... 57

Appendix ............................................................................................................................................. 58
7.1

Predictive Model Development and Variable Selection ............................................................. 58

Save the Date!....................................................................................................................... 61

3|Page

PI System software
The VM (virtual machine) used for this lab has the following PI System software installed:

Software

Version

PI Data Archive

2018 SP3

PI Asset Framework (PI AF) server

2018 SP3

PI Asset Framework (PI AF) client (PI System Explorer)

2018 SP3

PI Analysis & PI Notifications Services

2018 SP3

PI Vision
PI Integrator for Business Analytics
PI DataLink

2019
2018 R2 SP1
2019 SP1 (5.5.1)

For details on PI System software, please see http://www.osisoft.com/pi-system/pi-capabilities/productlist/

4|Page

1. Lab Overview
1.1

Objective

In this lab, we use analytical features of PI System to evaluate and then implement an idea for
improving plant operation. First, we’ll use Asset Analytics to add descriptive features to gain
process insight from the raw measurement data. The PI Integrator for Business Analytics will be
used to provide data to Power BI where we’ll perform multidimensional analysis allowing us to
validate our idea and quantify its value. Using DataLink, we develop a simple predictive model
for real-time operationalization in Asset Analytics. Then finally, we’ll use PI Notification to
recommend a process action based on the result of this prediction.

1.2

Gathering Domain Knowledge – PI Vision
The data we are using was taken from a years’ operation of two liquid feed
dryers. These are large cylindrical vessels (right), filled with molecular sieve
pellets. They are used to continuously remove moisture from a hydrocarbon
stream in an oil refinery. The liquid feed stream must be completely dry
before it combines with a strong acid which serves as a catalyst for the
chemical reaction. Even small amounts of water entering the reaction
create a highly corrosive environment that will damage and compromise the
equipment metallurgy.

The dryers are designed to be redundant, cycling between two operating
states. The “Drying” state is when dryer is actually removing moisture from
the liquid fed to the reactor. Once saturated, the dryer is switched to a
“Regenerating” state. In this state, a hot vapor stream is used to remove
water from the molecular sieve pellets inside the dryer. Thus, the dryers are cycled back and
forth between operating states to continuously remove moisture from the feed before it combines
with the strong acid catalyst for the chemical reaction.

The Feed Drying Process – Before
Solidify your process knowledge by looking at the process measurement data in PI Vision.
1. From the desktop icon, open ’PI Vision’ application.
2. From the PI Vision display thumbnails, double-click on the ‘Drying Process – Before’ tile
to open the display shown below.

5|Page

In the display above, Dryer A is in its “Drying” state while Dryer B is in its “Regenerating” state.
The moist liquid feed flows into the top of Dryer A, water is adsorbed in the molecular sieve pellet
bed and the dried liquid flows out the bottom and on to the reactor. Meanwhile, a small amount
of the feed is heated, vaporized and sent to Dryer B, which is in its “Regenerating” state. The hot
vapor stream raises the temperature of Dryer B’s bed, driving water out of the molecular sieve
and thus preparing it for its next drying cycle once Dryer A is saturated.
The process measurements available for this lab are shown in the display’s value and trend
objects.
Shown as values are:
Feed Flow - the moist, undried, liquid feed, (barrels per day)
Flow to Vaporizer - a small amount of feed which gets vaporized to regenerate molecular
sieve pellets (barrels per day)
Vapor Temp. - vapor temperature, (Deg. F)
Show as values and trends are:
Outlet Temp. - Dryer A orange) - temperature of stream leaving Dryer A, (Deg. F).
Outlet Temp. - Dryer B yellow – temperature of stream leaving Dryer B, (Deg. F).
Notice, there is no variable in the display showing the dryer’s current state. However, the Outlet
Temperature trend in the middle of the display shows the dryer outlet temperatures peaking in an
alternating fashion as they rise and fall with each regeneration. These temperature patterns will
be the basis for everything we do in this lab.
3. Select the ‘Outlet Temperatures’ trend and using the time scroll at the bottom adjust
display end time to find a time when Dryer A is in its “regenerating” state. This will occur
when Dryer A’s outlet temperature, the orange trace is peaking. An example of this
operation is shown below, everything works the opposite way.

6|Page

1.3

Process Improvement Idea – PI Vision

After several years of service, the molecular sieve beds will reach their end-of-life and need to be
replaced. The replacement of both beds will occur at the next planned refinery shutdown. The
most efficient way to manage the condition of these beds is to treat them equally throughout their
service life. The condition each bed sees could be measured by the amount of time they operate
in a particular state, however a more equitable metric is one based on the volume of moist
hydrocarbon feed they see during the drying cycle. The feedrate to this process can vary greatly
so times of high throughput are more taxing than times when the feedrate is low.
Our idea for process improvement is to provide more visibility and proactive management of the
dryers’ molecular sieve beds. We would like to display an indication of dryer state and to provide
a running total of barrels processed by each dryer for the life of this load of molecular sieve. This
will show how well we are managing the beds over time. As additional assistance, we would like
to provide an estimate of how long the next regenerating cycle will take for a dryer currently in its
“Drying” state. AF Notifications can send an email reminder to the process operator whenever
the estimated regeneration duration exceeds a prescribed time.

The Feed Drying Process – After
Take a look at the implementation of our idea. During the lab, you’ll be going through the steps
to make this happen.
1. Click the
logo on the upper left-hand corner of the PI vision display.
This will return you to the display thumbnails.
2. Double-click on the ‘Drying Process – After tile to open the display shown below.

7|Page

The same process measurements are shown however, we have added several others to add
visibility into the dryer’s current state, the total barrels of hydrocarbon feed it has dried and a
prediction of the time required for the next regenerating cycle.
Additional values are:
Dryer State – multi-stated value, “Drying”, “Regenerating”, or “Standby”
Drying Cycle Barrels – total barrels of feed through Dryer during current “Drying” cycle
(barrels).
Next Regeneration Cycle Duration – predictive model results estimating duration of next
regenerating cycle (hrs.)
Additional trends are:
Lifetime Barrels - Dryer A Teal – total barrels of feed through Dryer A during “Drying”
cycles (barrels).
Lifetime Barrels - Dryer B Cyan – total barrels of feed through Dryer A during “Drying”
cycles (barrels).

The AF Model
Of course, everything we do in this lab is based on an AF database. For this lab we use one
named ‘Dryers’. Familiarize yourself with the Dryers by completing the following steps.

1. From the Windows taskbar, open PI System Explorer
and be sure you’re
connected to the ‘Dryers’ database and that the Elements view is selected in the lower
left-hand corner.
2. Select the Dryer A element and the Attributes tab at the top. Take a look at the various
attributes configured for each dryer. (We won’t be using all of them for this lab.)

8|Page

3. With Dryer A element still selected, click the Analysis tab at the top. Here are the Asset
Analytics we’ll be using to help implement our improvement idea.

Both Dryer A and B elements have been derived from the Dryer template. The lab exercises
will be done in this template so everything we do will be applied both dryers.
4. Select the Library view in the lower left-hand corner of PI System Explorer. Under the
Templates branch of the hierarchy, expand Element Templates to expose the Dryer
template we are using for this lab. Click on the Dryer template and select the Analysis
Template tab at the top.

We will be configuring an email notification to proactively remind process operators when it
may be time to switch dryers. Notification rules are also configured in asset templates.
9|Page

5. Select the Notification rule Template tab at the top of the Dryer template.

10 | P a g e

2. Exploration and Data Engineering
2.1

Objective

There are two objectives for this exercise. First, we’ll calculate the operating state of each dryer
based on patterns in its outlet temperature. Status tags named ‘Dryers:My State A’ and
‘Dryers:My State B’ have been created to store your results. This will require some trial and
error to configure a rule that accurately identifies the state of each dryer and that works well for
all of 2019. You will be using the Preview Results and Backfill/Recalculate features of Asset
analytics to test and evaluate your results.
The second objective will be to calculate the total volume of hydrocarbon feed each dryer sees
during “Drying” cycles only. We will review the Asset Analysis configuration for the calculation of
two totals:
Lifetime Barrels – accumulated volume of feed during all drying cycles in 2019 (barrels)
Drying Cycle Barrels – total volume of feed during each drying cycle (barrels)

2.2

Define and Label Dryer Operating States – Asset Analytics

Take a closer look at the dryer outlet temperature patterns in PI Vision.
1. Open PI Vision from the desktop.
2. Click the
logo on the upper left-hand corner of the PI vision display.
This will return you to the display thumbnails.
3. From the PI Vision display thumbnails, double-click on the ‘Drying Process – Before’ tile
to open this display.
4. Expand the ‘Outlet Temperatures’ trend by double-clicking on it.

This trend clearly shows the heating and cooling of the dryer’s molecular sieve bed during the
regenerating cycle. We will use Asset Analytics to develop a rule, based on this outlet temperature
pattern, to identify each operating state and record it in a PI Tag. Sometimes rule development
requires several tries to get it right. This will be the case here as we work through the process to
develop the best rule for providing the labelling required for the rest of our analysis.
11 | P a g e

Good Operating State
Configure an Asset Analytic that defines dryer’s “Regenerating” cycle when be when its outlet
temperature goes above 170 Deg. F.

1. From the Windows taskbar, open PI System Explorer
connected to the ‘Dryers’ database.

and be sure you’re

2. In the lower left-hand corner of PI System Explorer, select the Library view. Under the
Templates branch of the hierarchy, expand Element Templates to expose the Dryer
template we are using for this lab. Click on the Dryer template.
3. To access the Asset Analytics defined for this template, click on the Analysis Templates
tab at the top of the window.

4. Click on the New Analysis Template icon and change the name of your new Analysis
Template to ‘My Dryer State’. By default, you have created a new Expression type
analysis. This is what we need.
5. Uncheck Enable analysis when created from template to prevent automatically
enabling this analytic. We have some testing to do first.

💡
12 | P a g e

By default, new Analysis Templates are configured to automatically
start when elements created from this template. In many cases you
will want to test your analysis first. Unchecking the ‘Enable analysis

Tip

when created from template’ option will give you complete control as
to when your analysis is run.

6. Copy and paste the following equation into the Expression field for Variable1 of the My
Dryer State.

// State based on dryer outlet temperature.
If 'Outlet Temperature' >= 170
Then (If PrevVal('My Operating State','*')="Regenerating"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Regenerating")
Else (If PrevVal('My Operating State', '*') = "Drying"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Drying")
This analysis simply changes the dryer state value to “Regenerating” whenever a temperature
value greater than 170 is observed. Once it falls below 170, the state is “Drying”. Values are only
posted upon a change in state.
7. The Dryer template has already been configured to have an attribute named ‘My
Operating State’ which point to the PI tags ‘Dryers:My State A’ and ‘Dryers:My State
B’ for Dryer elements Dryer A and Dryer B, respectively.
To the right of the Expression field, under Output Attribute, click the Map link and assign
the ‘My Operating State’ template attribute.
Also note that the Example Element for this template has be set to Dryer A. These
means that all evaluations and preview calculations will be done using Dryer A data. You
can change to another element by clicking the link and selecting a different one, e.g. Dryer
B.
You can rename the variable of your analysis from ‘Variable1’ to ‘MyStateRule’, (spaces
are not allowed in variable names).

8. Preview the results of this analytic using the Preview Results feature of Asset Analytics.
Right-click on the ’My Dryer State’ analytic in the Analysis list. Select Preview Results.
13 | P a g e

9. In the Preview Results window, set the Start Time to 11/10/19 and the End Time to
11/15/19. Click Generate Results to run the analysis for this time range. Select the
Multiple option for the Value Scale.

💡
Note
14 | P a g e

We are not saving results to PI tags yet. The Preview is just giving us
a way to check the results for errors within the Asset Analytics
environment.

The Preview shows a table and trend of analysis result over the specified time range. The results
table list the value of each variable for each calculation interval. In the trend, the stepped blue
trace shows the dryer’s operating state and the red trace is the dryer outlet temperature. There
appears to be something indecisive at the beginning of the regeneration cycles. We would expect
to see one step indicating the switch from the “Drying” to “Regenerating” state regeneration cycle
and we are getting several before there is a clear indication that the dryer is in the “Regenerating”
step.
10. Investigate the problem by zooming in on the trend to get more a more detailed view of
the data. Draw a box around the areas of interest until you determine the problem. Use
the Revert button to return to the original trend.

11. Further investigate these result in Excel. Click the Export Results button in the lower
right-hand corner of the Preview and download the data to a .CSV file on your desktop.
Open the file in Excel and scroll down the rows. The problem is more clearly illustrated
below.

Apparently, the output temperature oscillates around 170 Deg. F at the start of the regeneration
cycle before it rises consistently. We must try a better approach.

15 | P a g e

Better Operating State
Configure an Asset Analytic that defines dryer’s regeneration cycle starts when the rolling hourly
average of its outlet temperature goes above 170 Deg. F. This should solve the oscillation outlet
temperature problem.
1. Select the My Dryer State analysis and, using copy and paste, replace the Expression
for MyStateRule with the one shown below.

// State based on rolling one-hour average of dryer outlet temperature.
If TagAvg('Outlet Temperature','*-1h','*') >= 170
Then (If PrevVal('My Operating State','*')="Regenerating"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Regenerating")
Else (If PrevVal('My Operating State', '*') = "Drying"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Drying")
Feeling more confident, we will test this analysis using the Backfill\Recalculate feature of Asset
Analytics. We will run the backfill from the ’Dryer A’ element which will publish results into the PI
Tag, ‘Dryers:My State A’, which we have previously configured. We’ll check things over in PI
Vision when we’re done.
2. To run our analysis from the Dryer A element, we must first check in our changes to the
Dryer template. Click Check In at the top of PI System Explorer.

3. Select the Elements view in the lower left-hand corner of PI system explorer. Click on
the Dryer A element and go to its Analysis tab at the top.
4. Enable the ‘My Dryer State’ analysis by selecting it and clicking the Enable Analysis
button at the top. You will see a green checkmark appear once the analysis is running.

16 | P a g e

5. Right-click on the ’My Dryer State’ analysis in the Analysis list. Select
Backfill\Recalculate. In the dialog, enter a Start Time of 1/1/19 and an End time of
12/31/19. Check ‘Permanently delete existing data and recalculate’. Click Start to
backfill the results.

6. Once the green checkmark show up in the Backfilling column, disable the analysis by
clicking the Disable Analysis button at the top.

7. Open PI vision from the desktop. Launch a new PI Vision by clicking the
link in the upper right-hand corner of the browser. Under Assets, navigate the Dryers AF
Database and select Dryer A. Make sure a trend selected as the default visualization
object (upper left-hand corner). Drag attribute My Operating State onto the blank PI
Vision display to create a trend of this value. Select attribute Outlet Temperature and

17 | P a g e

drag it on top of the trend to add its trace. Change the start and end times of the display
to be 1/1/19 and 1/15/19, respectively.

8. Scroll the display through the year and visually inspect the results. Using an average
value of the Outlet Temperature works much better for defining the start and end times of
each regeneration cycle.
9. Return to the Assets pane, navigate the Dryers AF Database and select Dryer B. Select
this dryer’s attribute Outlet Temperature and drag it on top of the trend to add its trace.
Scroll the display to set the time range to someplace around 2/9/19 to 2/22/19.

Upon further review, it appears there are times when the dryer is neither in a Drying or
Regenerating state. We can define a third state, Standby, to account for this time. Minimize the
PI Vision window.

18 | P a g e

Best Operating State
Configure an Asset Analytic that defines all three states of the dryer’s operation, “Drying”,
“Regenerating” and “Standby”.
1. Return to the Library view in PI System Explorer. Select the Dryer Element Template
ad click on the Analysis Templates tab at the top of the window.
2. Select the My Dryer State analysis and, using copy and paste, replace the Expression
for MyStateRule with the one shown below.

// Check for Regeneration State.
If TagAvg('Outlet Temperature','*-1h','*') >= 170
Then (If PrevVal('My Operating State','*')="Regenerating"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Regenerating")
// Check for Standby State.
Else (If 'Outlet Temperature' >= 120
Then (If PrevVal('My Operating State', '*') = "Standby"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Standby")
// Must be Drying state.
Else (If PrevVal('My Operating State', '*') = "Drying"
Then NoOutput()
Else "Drying"))
3. Check in your changes by clicking Check In at the top of PI System Explorer.
Feeling even more confident, we will backfill the results into the PI Tags for both dryers.
4. In the lower left-hand corner of PI System Explorer, select the Management view. Here
is where you manage all the Asset Analytics configured for an AF Database. This
includes enabling, disabling and backfilling calculations.
5. Select the ‘My Dryer State’ analyses for the Dryer A and B elements. On the right-hand
side under Operations, click Enable.

19 | P a g e

6. Once the
appears in the Status column the analyses are up and running. Again
under Operations, click on Queue. This exposes the backfilling configuration dialog.
Configure the Start and End times to be ‘1/1/19’ and ‘12/31/19’, respectively. Check
‘Permanently delete existing data and recalculate’. This will allow the backfill service
to overwrite the results we stored for Dryer A in the previous step. And finally, click Queue
start backfilling results for the two dryers.

7. Once
appear under the Backfilling column, disable the analysis by clicking
Disable.
8. Reopen the PI vision display. You should see that the state tag has correctly identified
the “Standby” state.

20 | P a g e

2.3

Calculate Dryer Utilization Metrics – Asset Analytics

We have successfully defined a rule for determining dryer operating states and populated PI Tags
with these values. Now we can add two analyses to measure the utilization of the molecular sieve
beds. The first will calculate the volume, in barrels throughput, for each drying cycle. The second
will be a running total for all drying cycles since the start of 2019, when this load of molecular
sieve was first put into service. As you will see, these calculations are only possible because we
first created the required process context in the PI System, i.e. the dryer operating state values.
1. Return to the Library view in PI System Explorer. Select the Dryer Element Template
and click on the Analysis Templates tab at the top of the window.
2. Select the Total Dried Barrels analysis.

The Total Dried Barrels analysis generates two results which are stored into PI Tags referenced
by the AF Attributes Drying Cycle Barrels and Lifetime Barrels. This is a three-step analysis
that breaks down as follows;
Assign a variable, PreviousFeedFlowEvent to contain the timestamp of the last archive value of
the Feed Flow attribute (BPD).

// Find timestamp of last archive event for Process Flow.
PrevEvent('Feed Flow', '*')
Calculate Drying Cycle Barrels. Check for bad values of either the previously archived or current
value of the Feed Flow, the endpoints of the incremental total. If good values are returned, add
the incremental total to the Drying Cycle Barrels attribute when the dryer is in a Drying state.
Otherwise reset its value to zero. If either value of the Feed Flow is bad, do nothing.

// Calculate total feed processed during this drying cycle.
If Not(BadVal(PrevVal('Feed Flow','*'))) And Not(BadVal('Feed Flow'))
Then (If 'Best Operating State'="Drying"
Then 'Drying Cycle Barrels' + TagTot('Feed Flow', PreviousFeedFlowEvent,'*')
Else 0)
21 | P a g e

Else NoOutput()

💡
Note

In this calculation we are converting a flow rate in barrels/day to a
volume, barrels. The ‘TagTot’ function handles this conversion AND
also handles cases where values stored in the PI Archive are not
evenly time spaced.

Calculate Lifetime Barrels. Check for bad values of either the previously archived or current
value of the Feed Flow, the endpoints of the incremental total. If good values are returned, add
the incremental total to the Lifetime Barrels attribute when the dryer is in a Drying state.
Otherwise do nothing. If either value of the Feed Flow is bad, do nothing.

// Calculate total of feed processed during life of drying bed.
If Not(BadVal(PrevVal('Feed Flow','*'))) And Not(BadVal('Feed Flow'))
Then (If 'Best Operating State' = "Drying"
Then 'Lifetime Barrels' + TagTot('Feed Flow', PreviousFeedFlowEvent,'*')
Else NoOutput())
Else NoOutput()
5.

Open PI Vision from the desktop.

6. Click the
logo on the upper left-hand corner of the PI vision display.
This will return you to the display thumbnails.
7. From the PI Vision display thumbnails, double-click on the ‘Total Barrels Dried’ tile to
open this display.

22 | P a g e

3. Contextualization and Data Preparation
3.1

Objective

In this exercise we will configure Event Frames to prepare useful process information for each
dryer regeneration cycle. The Event Frame attributes we choose are ones we will find useful for
qualifying our idea and for building the model to estimate the duration of the next dryer
regeneration cycle.

3.2

Prepare Dryer Regeneration Features - Event Frame Template

Event Frames produce records, stored in the PI System, containing the start time, end time and
duration of significant processing periods, like dryer regeneration cycles. We can add other
values, pertaining to the regeneration cycles, to the Event Frame records using Asset Analytics.
Here, we will add the following attributes of interest.
•

Average Outlet Temperature, Deg. F.

•

Maximum Outlet Temperature, Deg. F.

•

Average Regenerating Temperature, Deg. F.

•

Maximum Regenerating Temperature, Deg. F.

•

Drying Cycle Barrels, barrels

•

Drying Cycle Duration, hrs.

•

Regen Cycle Vapor, barrels

There are two steps in configuring Event Frames. The first is creating an Event Frame template
which defines the naming pattern and attributes. The second is configuring the Asset Analytic to
trigger the start and end of the Event Frame period. In this example, we will also generate values
for several of the attributes in the above list using Asset Analytics. This is a very powerful feature,
as you will see.
An Event Frame template has been created for you to use. After walking through its configuration,
we will configure an analytic to generate the event Frames themselves.
1. In PI System Explorer, select the Library view. Under the Templates branch of the
hierarchy, expand Event Frame Templates and select the My Dryer Regeneration
Cycle template. The Naming Pattern is specified under the General tab. Event Frame
names use substitution parameters. Click the
to get some hints.

at the far right-hand of the name field

23 | P a g e

2.

Select the Attribute Templates tab at the top to see the list of attributes. Expand the
attribute configuration dialog by clicking the
along the right-hand boarder of PI System
Explorer. Select the Avg Outlet Temp attribute.

There are two attribute categories for this template, Asset Analytic Calculations and Asset
Attribute Aggregations. Let’s take a look at the second group first.
3. Click through the list of Asset Attribute Aggregations. These values will be calculated
when the Event Frame ends and are derived from the attributes defined in the associated
element. In this case, the Dryer A and Dryer B elements. They all have a PI Point Data
Reference since their values will come from a PI Point aggregation.
The following table shows the expression syntax used to define these attributes.
Attribute

Settings

Avg Outlet Temp

.\Elements[.]|Outlet Temperature;TimeRangeMethod=Average

Avg Regen Temp

.\Elements[.]|Regenerant Temperature;TimeRangeMethod=Average

Max Outlet Temp

.\Elements[.]|Outlet Temperature;TimeRangeMethod=Maximum

Max Regen Temp

.\Elements[.]|Regenerant Temperature;TimeRangeMethod=Maximum

24 | P a g e

4. Click on any one of the attributes in the Asset Analytic Calculation list. Notice there are
no settings specified and they have no Data Reference specified. These are merely
placeholders to contain the result of an Asset Analytics calculation which occurs upon the
end or close of the Event Frame. We will configure this calculation next section.
5. Under Element Templates, return to the Dryer template and select Analysis Templates
tab at the top.
6. Make a copy of the Dryer Regeneration Events analysis by right-clicking on it and
selecting Copy. Then, right-click again and select Paste. Select the copied analysis,
Dryer Regeneration Events1 and rename it to My Dryer Regeneration Events.
7. Change the Event Frame Template this analysis will use to be My Dryer Regeneration
Cycle. This is done from the Event Frame Template dropdown shown below.

8. Click the Map link for each Output at Close expression and match it with its corresponding
Attribute in the Event Frame Template. Be careful the order is not the same.
9. Review the Start Trigger expression. When this condition it TRUE, the Event Frame
starts. Once it becomes FALSE, the Event Frame ends.

StartTrigger

// Use Operating State as Event Frame trigger. By default,
// Event Frame will end when Operating State returns
// to "Standby" or "Drying".
'Best Operating State'="Regenerating"

Two of the values we want included in the Event Frame are calculated with respect to the
Drying cycle that immediately precedes a Regeneration Cycle. To find out when the last

25 | P a g e

Drying cycle started, we use two Variable expressions to perform a two-step backward
search into the PI Archive to retrieve timestamps of these events.
Name
PreviousRegenEvent

PreviousDryingEvent

Expression
// Search backwards for last "Regenerating" event time.
FindEq('Best Operating State','*','-7d', "Regenerating")

// Search backwards for last "Drying" event time,
// prior to last "Regenerating" event.
FindEq('Best Operating State',PreviousRegenEvent, '-7d', "Drying")

10. We use Output Expressions to calculate the needed aggregations the remaining values for
our Event Frame Template. These expressions leverage the Event Frame Start and End
times, as well as, the timestamp variable retrieved above. They are evaluated when the Event
Frame closes and are posted as values to the “placeholder” attributes we have configured in
the Event Frame Template.

Name
RegenCycleVapor

DryingCycleBarrels

DryingCycleDuration

Expression
// Calculate total flow to vaporizer during tis regeneration cycle.
TagTot('Regenerant Vapor Flow', EventFrame("StartTime"),
EventFrame("EndTime"))

// Drying Cycle Barrels in previous Drying cycle.
TagMax('Drying Cycle Barrels', PreviousDryingEvent, '*')

// Duration in hours of previous Drying cycle.
TimeEq('Best Operating State', PreviousDryingEvent,'*',"Drying")
/3600

11. Click the Evaluate button to preview the results and make sure there are no errors. If it
all looks good, Check In your changes.

26 | P a g e

3.3

Generate Regeneration Data for Analysis - Event Frames

Generate the Event Frames to capture the data needed to analyze the dryer regenerations for
2019.
1. Return to the Management view in PI System Explorer. Select the ‘My Dryer
Regeneration Events’ analyses for the Dryer A and B elements. On the right-hand side
under Operations, click Enable.

2. Once the
appears in the Status column the analyses are up and running. Again
under Operations, click on Queue. This exposes the backfilling configuration dialog.
Configure the Start and End times to be ‘1/1/19’ and ‘12/31/19’, respectively. Check
‘Permanently delete existing data and recalculate’. This will allow the backfill service
to overwrite the results we stored for Dryer A in the previous step. And finally, click Queue
start backfilling Event Frames for the two dryers.

27 | P a g e

3. Once the
Disable.

appears under the Backfilling column, disable the analysis by clicking

4. Select the Event Frames view in the lower left-hand corner of PI System Explorer. Launch
the Event Frame Search from the top menu.

5. Set the Search to ‘Ending After’ and the Template to ‘My Dryer Regeneration Cycle’.
Click Search to find the Event Frames matching this criteria.

28 | P a g e

6. The default Event Frame search does not show attributes in the results. Click the
at
the upper right-hand corner of the results grid and click Select Attributes to bring up the
dialog below.

7. Click
to select all attributes. Click OK. Then click OK in the Event Frame Search
dialog. This brings all Event Frame records into PI System Explorer. We are now ready
to extract this data from PI for analysis.

29 | P a g e

4. Data Analysis and Qualification
4.1

Objectives

The previous sections of this lab have so far provided us with the data set necessary to start to
formulate a model to predict the behavior of the regeneration times for the dryers. In the following
section we will be taking the event frame Dryer Regeneration Cycle data and analyzing this set of data to
find relationships between the parameters we have and the resulting regeneration times.
The objective of this section is to analyze the Dryer Regeneration Cycle event frame data using various
tools at our disposal including Power BI and Excel, and to qualify which variables are important to take
into account for our predictive model. We will also be demonstrating how the PI System can enable data
analysis and qualification within these tools through the use of the PI Integrator for Business Analytics as
well as the PI DataLink Add-In for Excel.
In the following section we will:
•
•
•
•

Export the Dryer event frame data into a .CSV file using the PI Integrator for Business Analytics
Import the .CSV Dryer data into Power BI and examine the relationships between the dryer
operating states to confirm the initial problem assessment
Examine the Dryer Event Frame data in Excel using PI DataLink and decide on a variable to use
for predicting Dryer Regeneration Time
Utilize basic charting and best fit line functionality within Excel to generate a linear model to
predict Dryer Regeneration Time

In addition to providing you with hands-on experience using the PI Integrator for Business Analytics and
Power BI, the main reason we are going through the trouble of bringing in this data into Power BI is to
confirm our initial hypothesis that there is in fact an imbalance in the use of these two dryers.
Remember that the overall goal of this analytics project is to formulate a model to predict and
standardize the dryer phases in order utilize the dryers in a more balanced way. It is extremely beneficial
from a financial and maintenance standpoint to have these dryers end of life around the same time, and
the goal of looking at the dryer phases in Power BI is to confirm that they are not currently being used
evenly. From a bigger picture perspective, it is helpful to do this sort of ‘sanity check’ in the middle of a
larger analytics project to confirm that the problems you are trying to solve are in fact real, and that the
project is worth taking to the next stages of completion.

4.2 Problem Assessment – PI integrator for Business Analytics and
Power BI
From the Windows taskbar, open PI System Explorer and review the ‘Dryers’
database. We will be using the PI Integrator for Business Analytics to create an
event frame view publication based on the event frames built upon this asset model.
The publication target will be a .CSV file posted in the subdirectory C:\PI World\ (this

30 | P a g e

is also the ‘PI World’ folder shortcut on the desktop). This .CSV file will provide the
data for populating our dataset and analyzing in Power BI.
1. Open the PI Integrator for Business Analytics from the desktop shortcut.
2. Click Create Event View on the top menu. Name your view ‘My Dryer
Regenerations’ and click Create View.

3. On the Select Data page, select the Dryers database. Select one of the listed event
frames under the Source Events Section on the left. Drag and drop this event into the
Search Shape area in the middle of the screen under Event Shape.
4. On the event frame that was just dragged to the center, click on the Edit
pencil icon to the right to bring up the Edit Filters option. Adjust the filter to
use the ‘Dryer Regeneration’ event frame template rather than the Event
Frame Name.

5. With the same event frame highlighted on the left section under Source
Events, notice the attributes associated with these event frames just below in
the Attributes Section.
31 | P a g e

6. Click and drag each of these attributes to the center of the screen under the
‘Dryer Regeneration Cycle’ parent that was just created in the middle of the
screen. Your event shape should now look like the one below:

7. With the shape selected and the filters set, you should see 100+ event
frames matching the criteria listed in the Matches area on the right.

32 | P a g e

8. Click on the Next button on the upper right corner to proceed to the Modify
View page.
9. The Modify View page shows a preview of the first 100 rows of data from the
first 100 event frames matching the Event Shape. Set the time range, 1/1/19
5:00 AM to 12/31/19 12:00 AM, to match the available PI data for the lab.
Click Apply.

10. Highlight the Event Frame Duration column to bring up the Column Details
pane on the right. Adjust the Data Type to ‘Single’ to get the additional digits
for duration.

33 | P a g e

11. Click Next to proceed to the Publish page.
12. Select CSV File as the Target Configuration and click Publish, then Confirm
to publish the data as a .CSV file.

13. The file name will be the name of the asset view, My Dryer Regenerations,
and it will be in the subdirectory, C:\PI World (this is also the ‘PI World’ folder
shortcut on the desktop). This target was configured using the Administration
pages of the PI Integrator for Business Analytics.
Assessment of Dryer Regeneration Data in Power BI
Now that we have the years’ worth of dryer regeneration event data in .CSV file
format, we can easily ingest it into Power BI for further analysis. Within Power BI, we
will be plotting the dryer states (Drying, Standby, Regenerating) for each dryer as a
function of time (using weeks as our unit of time). This type of analysis lends itself
very well to the capabilities of Power BI and illustrates the benefits of using the PI
Integrator for BA to shape the data.
1. From the desktop, open the Power BI Report ‘Regeneration Analysis.pbix’
2. Alternatively, if you’d like to build out the Power BI Report yourself, follow
these steps:
I.

From the desktop, open the ‘Power BI Desktop’ application.

II.

Import the ‘Dryer Regenerations.csv’ file. Click on the ‘Get Data’
option at the top of the application and choose the ‘Text/CSV’ file
option. Click on ‘Connect’

34 | P a g e

III.

Choose the ‘Dryer Regenerations.csv’ file in the C:\PI World
location and click ‘Open’

IV.

Click ‘Load’ to import the dataset into Power BI.

35 | P a g e

V.

Add a column to the dataset to assign the week number. Click on the
‘Data’ View
rather than the ‘Report’ view
on the top left of
the application to see the tabular dataset we just imported. Click on
the ‘New Column’ action on the top toolbar.

VI.

In the formula bar with the new column highlighted, type the following
and click the check box to commit :
Week = WEEKNUM('Dryer Regenerations’[TimeStamp])

VII.

Add a column to the dataset to note which dryer is involved in each
event. Click on the ‘Data’ View
rather than the ‘Report’ view
on the top left of the application to see the tabular dataset we just
imported. Click on the ‘New Column’ action on the top toolbar. In the
formula bar with the new column highlighted, type the following and
click the check box to commit :
Dryer = LEFT('Dryer Regenerations’[Dryer Regeneration Cycle], 7)

36 | P a g e

VIII.

Add a new measure to calculate the total time each dryer is in the
‘Drying’ stage. Click on the ‘New Measure’ action on the top toolbar.

IX.

In the formula bar with the new measure column highlighted,
type/paste the following and click the check box to commit :
Drying Time = CALCULATE(SUM('Dryer Regenerations'[Drying Cycle
Duration]), FILTER(ALLEXCEPT('Dryer Regenerations','Dryer
Regenerations'[Dryer],'Dryer Regenerations'[Event Frame Duration]),'Dryer
Regenerations'[Week]<=MAX('Dryer Regenerations'[Week])))

X.

Add a new measure to calculate the total time each dryer is in the
‘Regenerating’ stage. Click on the ‘New Measure’ action on the top
toolbar. In the formula bar with the new measure column highlighted,
type/paste the following and click the check box to commit:
Regenerating Time = CALCULATE(SUM('Dryer Regenerations'[Event Frame
Duration]),FILTER(ALLEXCEPT('Dryer Regenerations','Dryer
Regenerations'[Dryer],'Dryer Regenerations'[Event Frame Duration]),'Dryer
Regenerations'[Week]<=MAX('Dryer Regenerations'[Week])))

XI.

Add a new measure to calculate the total time each dryer is in the
‘Regenerating’ stage. Click on the ‘New Measure’ action on the top
toolbar. In the formula bar with the new measure column highlighted,
type/paste the following and click the check box to commit:
Standby Time = CALCULATE(DISTINCTCOUNT('Dryer
Regenerations'[Week])*168-SUM('Dryer Regenerations'[Event Frame Duration])SUM('Dryer Regenerations'[Drying Cycle Duration]),FILTER(ALLEXCEPT('Dryer
Regenerations','Dryer Regenerations'[Dryer],'Dryer Regenerations'[Event Frame
Duration]),'Dryer Regenerations'[Week]<=MAX('Dryer Regenerations'[Week])))

XII.

Switch back to the ‘Report’ View
. We now want to build out three charts
displaying each of the Dryer States as a function of Week for each dryer. Your
report will eventually look like the one below:

37 | P a g e

XIII.

Create a Line Chart for Drying Time by Week and Dryer. Choose the Line
Chart Visual and populate the fields as shown:

XIV.

Create a Line Chart for Standby Time by Week and Dryer. Choose the Line
Chart Visual and populate the fields as shown:

XV.

Create a Line Chart for Regenerating Time by Week and Dryer. Choose the
Line Chart Visual and populate the fields as shown:

38 | P a g e

XVI.

Create four Card visualizations to calculate the average hours of Drying and
Regenerating times for each cycle in each dryer. For the Average Drying time
card, populate the Fields with the Drying Cycle Duration item and choose to
display the Average value. In the dropdown, choose ‘New Quick Measure.’
Choose the ‘Filtered Value’ Calculation. Drag the Dryer item into the Filter field
and filter on Dryer A.

39 | P a g e

XVII.
XVIII.

40 | P a g e

Repeat this process three more times for the average hours Dryer and
Regeneration times for each cycle in each dryer.
Once complete, your report should look similar to the one below:

3. Let’s take a moment to analyze the 2019 Dryer Operating States Power BI
report above. From this report, we can quickly see that there is a clear
imbalance between the two dryers in terms of utilization. On average, Dryer A
has longer drying cycle times than Dryer B. Conversely, Dryer B has longer
Regenerating cycle times on average.

💡
Tip

Plotting this data in Power BI, a Business Analytics tool,
makes it easy to see the cumulative use of each dryer
throughout the year using weeks as the unit of time. The
plots above are cumulative slices of data rather than the
simple 2-d (x,y) plotting that excel is capable of. This is why
we are using Power BI at this step of the project.

With this visual, we can confirm that the problem we are trying to solve does in
fact exist and it is worth moving forward with the project.

4.3

Model Development – PI DataLink

In the previous section, we illustrated the use of the PI Integrator for BA to publish
data into Power BI for analysis. In this section, we will illustrate how PI Datalink and
Excel can also be used to analyze our Dryer dataset and how we can use basic
Excel functionality to generate a linear model to predict regenerating times for each
dryer, which we can use for our simple predictive model.
At this point in the Analytics project, it’s important to get assistance from Subject
Matter Experts (SMEs) who understand the process we are modeling – to ensure we
end up with helpful and meaningful results. Our SME in this case has indicated that
the Drying Cycle Barrels variable that we have – which corresponds to the number
of barrels dried in the previous drying cycle – will be the best one to predict
preceding regeneration cycle time.

💡
Note

For a brief discussion/explanation on why we decided on Drying Cycle
Barrels as our predictive variable to inform regeneration time, see the
Appendix section 7.1.

1. On the desktop, open up the Excel file ‘PI World Dryer Regen
Duration.xlsx’
2. There are three sheets in the ‘PI World Dryer Regen Duration.xlsx’ file.
a. The first sheet titled ‘Dryer A’ has also been built out for you. Since
we’ve chosen the Drying Cycle Barrels as our dependent variable for
our linear prediction model, we are focusing on that variable here. The
event frame search has brought in the Duration and Drying Cycle
Barrels data for the year 2019. We’ve also filtered out any event
frames with a prior Drying Cycle Duration of less than 10 hours – you
can see how this can be done in the Event Frame search in the next
step. This purpose of this filter is to remove any “false starts” in the
41 | P a g e

data, when a drying cycle is shorter than typical. This would result in a
skewed prediction and we will account for this in our regeneration
prediction forecast.
This sheet plots the Regeneration Cycle duration as a function of the
Drying Cycle Barrels variable – the number of barrels the dryer
processed in the previous drying cycle.
This scatter chart has a linear best-fit line indicating the relationship
that the Drying Cycle Barrels variable has on the Regeneration Cycle
Time. We will be using this equation of the derived linear regression
line as our model to predict Regeneration Cycle Duration.

💡
Note

This is clearly a rather simple predictive model that could be more
advanced, but for the purposes of this lab we are focusing on the
methodology of starting analytics and data science projects with the
common tools at our disposal to get us started and familiarized with
the basics.

b. The second sheet titled ‘My Dryer B’ has not yet been built out for
you. To give you experience importing event frame data into Excel
using PI DataLink, follow the steps below to build out the same charts
as ‘Dryer A’ and to develop our linear regression model for Dryer B. If
you’d prefer to use a pre-built sheet for Dryer B, it is the last sheet in
the workbook titled ‘Dryer B’.
42 | P a g e

i. Bring in all the event frame data for the year 2019 using PI
DataLink. Make sure you’re in the ‘PI DataLink’ ribbon add-in
to Excel. Click on ‘Explore’ tool in the events tool section of PI
DataLink.

ii. Enter the following parameters for your event frame search
such that it looks like the one below and click Apply:
1. Database: \\PISRV01\Dryers
2. Event Name: *
3. Search Start: 1/1/2019
4. Search End: 12/31/2019
5. Event Template: Dryer Regeneration Cycle
6. Element Name: Dryer B
7. Element Template: *
8. +More Search Options>Attribute Value Filters:
‘Drying Cycle Duration’ > 10
9. Select Columns to Display:
•

Event Name

•

Drying Cycle Barrels

•

Duration

43 | P a g e

iii. Add a column to the end of the dataset (should be column D)
to convert the duration into hours. To do this, simply multiply
the imported duration by 24 and change the format of the cells
in that column to be of type Number with two decimals.
44 | P a g e

iv. Once the event frame data is brought into the ‘Dryer B’ sheet,
we can now use Excel’s charting functionality to plot the
Regeneration Cycle duration as a function of each variable.
v. Within Excel, click on the Insert ribbon at the top and choose
the Scatter plot

vi. Right click on the scatter plot and click ‘Select Data.’ On the
Select Data window, the range of values for Duration (Hours)
will be the dependent y-axis on this chart and the Drying Cycle
Barrels variable will be on the x-axis.
vii. On this chart, click to Add a Chart Element of a Linear
Trendline. Format the trendline to Display Equation on chart
and to Display R-squared value on chart. Once complete,
you should have a chart that looks like the one below:

45 | P a g e

We now have a linear regression model for each dryer using the variable of Drying
Cycle Barrels, or the number of barrels dried during the preceding drying cycle, that
we will use to predict the proceeding Regeneration Cycle Duration in the next
section.
Dryer A
Y = 0.0003X + 9.6722
Where Y = Regeneration Duration and X = Drying Cycle Barrels
Dryer B
Y = 0.0006X + 9.5749
Where Y = Regeneration Duration and X = Drying Cycle Barrels

46 | P a g e

5. Operationalization and Notification
5.1

Objective

The purpose of this last section of this analytics project is to operationalize the linear model we derived
in the previous section to generate a prediction for dryer regeneration time. In the following section we
will:
•
•

5.2

Create a forecasting analytic using AF Analytics to predict dryer regeneration times
Create a notification to alert operators when dryer regeneration times are predicted to be 11
hours or more

Forecast Deployment – AF Analytics

From the Windows taskbar, open PI System Explorer and be sure you’re connected
to the ‘Dryers’ database.
First off, we will be using an AF Table to store the coefficients of our linear
regression lines from the previous section.
1. Navigate to the Library and the Dryer Data under Tables. The table and the
coefficients for each Dryer’s equation have been built for you. Take a moment
to confirm that these are correct.

We will be creating an AF Analytic for the forecast equation at the template level for
the dryers.
1. Navigate to the Library and the Dryer template under Element Templates.
2. Click on the Analysis Templates Tab and click on the New Analysis
Template option.

Name your new Analysis Template ‘My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time
Forecast.’ This analysis has already been build out under the name ‘Dryer
47 | P a g e

Regeneration Cycle Time’ but we want you to be able to build out the
expression on your own. By default, you have created a new Expression
type analysis. This is what we need.
3. We will be creating a multi-line analysis utilizing the multi-variable capability
of AF Analytics. The first step in our analysis is to find the last drying event.
We will be making use of new AF Analytics functions that allow for array
calculations. Let’s us the RecordedValuesByCount function to grab the past
10 states of the dryer. Create a variable called PastTenStates and input the
following formula:
RecordedValuesByCount('Best Operating State','*',10)

This operation will create an array of 10 values consisting of the past 10
states the dryer has had. To view the output of the operation, click on
Evaluate and hover your mouse over the Blue Information Symbol next to
the evaluation.

4. We now want to filter this array to only capture the states where the dryer is
in “Drying” mode. Create another variable called PastDryingStates and
input the following formula:
FilterData(PastTenStates,$val="Drying")

This operation will create an array of filtered values consisting of the past
“Drying” phases and their associated timestamps.

5. Let’s grab the most recent drying event. Create a new variable called
LastDryingEvent and input the following:
TimeStamp(PastDryingStates[1])

This operation grabs the timestamp of first value in the PastDryingStates
array, or the most recent drying phase’s associated timestamp.
6. We want the analysis to check how long the dryer has been in the drying
state. Create a new variable called HrsIntoDryingCycle and input the
following:

48 | P a g e

TimeEq('Best Operating State', LastDryingEvent, '*',
"Drying")/3600

This operation will output (in hours) the length of time that the dryer has been
in the drying phase.
7. Finally, we want to input our forecasting equation. Create a new variable
called ForecastedRegenCycleDuration and input the following:
If 'Best Operating State' = "Drying" And HrsIntoDryingCycle >= 10
Then 'Regeneration Cycle Model Slope' * 'Drying Cycle Barrels' +
'Regeneration Cycle Model Intercept'
Else 0

This operation first checks that the dryer is in the drying phase and if it has
been in the drying phase longer than 10 hours. If those conditions are met, it
then applies the coefficients from our linear regression model stored in the
Dryer Data table previously created. Otherwise, if the initial conditions aren’t
met, then the forecast is not performed. Remember – we only want this
prediction to be made when the dryer is in the current drying phase.

💡
Note

Why did we add the condition in the previous equation to check if the
Drying Phase has been longer than 10 hours?
Remember that during our modeling, we filtered out event frame data
where any Drying Cycle Durations shorter than 10 hours. It’s important
to account for these filters in your prediction logic.

8. The Dryer template has already been configured to have an attribute named ‘My
Forecasted Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’ which point to the PI tags ‘Dryer A.My
Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast.%ID%’ and ‘Dryer B.My Dryer
Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast_%ID%’ for Dryer elements Dryer A and Dryer B,
respectively.
To the right of the Expression field, under Output Attribute, click the Map link and assign
the ‘My Forecasted Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’ template attribute for the
ForecastedRegenCycleDuration variable.
Also note that the Example Element for this template has be set to Dryer A. These
means that all evaluations and preview calculations will be done using Dryer A data. You
can change to another element by clicking the link and selecting a different one, e.g. Dryer
B.
9. Check in your changes by clicking Check In at the top of PI System Explorer.
10. We now have our complete analysis which is forecasting the duration of the
regeneration cycle using the Drying Cycle Barrels of the preceding drying
phase as a predictor. Your complete analysis should look like the one below,
and should evaluate like the one below:

49 | P a g e

11. You can use the Preview Results feature of AF Analytics to confirm that the
Analysis is functioning. Right-click on your analysis and click on Preview
Results.

12. In the lower left-hand corner of PI System Explorer, select the Management view. Here
is where you manage all the Asset Analytics configured for an AF Database. This
includes enabling, disabling and backfilling calculations.
13. Select the ‘My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’ analyses for the Dryer A and
B elements. On the right-hand side under Operations, click Enable.
14. Once the
appears in the Status column the analyses are up and running. Again
under Operations, click on Queue. This exposes the backfilling configuration dialog.
Configure the Start and End times to be ‘*-7d’ and ‘*’, respectively. And finally, click
Queue start backfilling results for the two dryers.

50 | P a g e

5.3

Proactive Solution – PI Notifications

Now that we have a working analysis whose output will tell us the predicted duration
for each regeneration phase, we want to be able to take this one step further – to
notify operators when to end the drying phase for one dryer and begin regeneration
(switch which dryer is active). Remember, the ultimate goal here is to balance the
use of each dryer such that they will have a similar end of life – significantly reducing
replacement costs and required downtime.
In this last section we will:
•

Create an Event Frame analysis to store an event any time the expected
Regeneration forecast is greater than or equal to 11 hours.

•

Create a notification rule to send an e-mail to the student01@pischool.int
account any time the expected Regeneration forecast is greater than or equal
to 11 hours.

Analysis for Event Frame Generation
1. An Event Frame template has been created for you to use. After walking through its
configuration, we will configure an analytic to generate the Event Frames themselves. In
PI System Explorer, select the Library view. Under the Templates branch of the
hierarchy, expand Event Frame Templates and select the Regeneration Time
Notification template. The Naming Pattern is specified under the General tab.
2. Select the Attribute Templates tab at the top to see the list of attributes.
Expand the attribute configuration dialog by clicking the
hand boarder of PI System Explorer.

along the right-

3. You can see that this particular template will store the Forecasted Regeneration Cycle
Time and the Last Drying Cycle Time. Just like in the previous event frame, these are
merely placeholders to contain the result of an Asset Analytics calculation which occurs
upon the end or close of the Event Frame. We will configure this calculation in the next
steps.
4. In PI System Explorer, navigate back to the Dryer element template in the Library under
Element Templates. Click and navigate to the Analysis Templates tab.
5. Create a new Analysis Template by clicking
. Rename it ‘My Dryer Notification’. Set
the Analysis Type to Event Frame Generation. Uncheck Enable analysis when
creating from template. Assign the Event Frame Template to Regeneration Time
Notification. Note that the Example Element has been assigned to Dryer A by default.
6. Similar to our My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast, we will be using AF
Analytics array functions to grab the timestamp of the latest drying event.
a. We will be creating a multi-line analysis utilizing the multi-variable
capability of AF Analytics. The first step in our analysis is to find the
last drying event. We will be making use of new AF Analytics
functions that allow for array calculations. Let’s us the
RecordedValuesByCount function to grab the past 10 states of the
dryer. Create a variable called PastTenStates and input the following
formula:
51 | P a g e

RecordedValuesByCount('Best Operating State','*',10)

This operation will create an array of 10 values consisting of the past
10 states the dryer has had. To view the output of the operation, click
on Evaluate and hover your mouse over the Blue Information
Symbol next to the evaluation.
b. We now want to filter this array to only capture the states where the
dryer is in “Drying” mode. Create another variable called
PastDryingStates and input the following formula:
FilterData(PastTenStates,$val="Drying")

This operation will create an array of filtered values consisting of the
past “Drying” phases and their associated timestamps.
c. Let’s grab the most recent drying event. Create a new variable called
LastDryingEvent and input the following:
TimeStamp(PastDryingStates[1])

This operation grabs the timestamp of first value in the
PastDryingStates array, or the most recent drying phase’s
associated timestamp.
7. Add a Start Trigger with the following logic:
'My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’ >= 11
8. Add an End Trigger with the following logic:
'My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’ >= 11

This event frame will be captured and begin and end when the
predicted regeneration cycle duration is greater than or equal to 11.
9. To write to the Forecasted Regeneration Cycle Time and the Last Drying
Cycle Time attributes of the Event Frame template, we will be using Output
Expressions.
a. Add an output expression called CurrentForecast and input the
following expression
TagVal('My Dryer Regeneration Cycle Time Forecast’,
EventFrame("StartTime"))

This expression will output the value of the predicted regeneration
time at the start time of the event frame.
Map this output expression to the Forecasted Regeneration Cycle
Time attribute of the Event Frame Template
b. Add an output expression called LastDryingCycle and input the
following expression
LastDryingEvent

This will write the value of the LastDryingEvent variable you created
previously.

52 | P a g e

Map this output expression to the Last Drying Cycle Time attribute of
the Event Frame Template.
10. Your complete My Dryer Notification Event Frame should look like this:

11. Click the Evaluate button to preview the results and make sure there are no errors. If it
all looks good, Check In your changes.
12. Return to the Management view in PI System Explorer. Select the ‘My Dryer
Notification’ analyses for the Dryer A and B elements. On the right-hand side under
Operations, click Enable.
13. Once the
appears in the Status column the analyses are up and running. Again
under Operations, click on Queue. This exposes the backfilling configuration dialog.
Configure the Start and End times to be ‘*-7d’ and ‘*’, respectively. And finally, click
Queue start backfilling Event Frames for the two dryers.
Create a Notification Rule
The next step from here is to create a New Notification Rule Template from this My
Dryer Notification Event Frame.
1. Under the Analysis Details on the top right of PI System Explorer, click on the
blue hyperlinked text that says “Create a new notification rule template for
My Dryer Notification”
2. Call this new notification rule template “My Dryer Notification”
3. Under the Subscriptions section, click on View/Edit Subscriptions
4. Expand student01 and drag the E-mail endpoint under student01 into the
Subscriptions section. Click OK and Check In.
Configure Notification Message Formatting

53 | P a g e

1. Click on the blue Manage Formats link in the Subscriptions section. Select the line
with Global Default Email (color changes to light blue) and click on the Duplicate icon
above. Rename the duplicated format as My Dryer Notification Email.
2. Change the subject of the e-mail to:
3. Remove the items for Server, Database, and Severity.
4. Add an informative message to tell the operators the predicted regeneration time and
instruct them to switch dryers. It should like similar to this:

5. At the bottom of the design window, add a link to the ‘Drying Process – After’ PI Vision
Display.
a. Click on the Insert Link option and enter the URI of the PI Vision page showing
the drying states: https://pisrv01/PIVision/#/Displays/10/Drying-Process--After. Click Continue.
b. Enter PI Vision Drying Process in the Text to Display field.
c. Set the time context for the PI Vision link:
i. Enter a new Key for starttime with a value of ‘*-7d’.
ii. Enter a new Key for endtime with a value of ‘*’.
iii. Your create link window should look like below when completed:

d. Click OK and Check In.
6. Your message configuration window should look like the one below when complete:

54 | P a g e

7. Click on the Test Send button and enter in the student01@pischool.int email address.
8. Open up Outlook from the Desktop or the Taskbar. You should have received the test
e-mail. Open the e-mail and confirm the formatting and that the PI Vision link works.
Confirming Notifications
1. Return to the Management view in PI System Explorer. Select the ‘My Dryer
Notification’ analyses for the Dryer A and B elements. On the right-hand side under
Operations, click Enable.
2. Once the
appears in the Status column the analyses are up and running. Again
under Operations, click on Queue. This exposes the backfilling configuration dialog.
Configure the Start and End times to be ‘*-7d’ and ‘*’, respectively. And finally, click
Queue start backfilling Event Frames for the two dryers.

55 | P a g e

You should be receiving e-mails after the analysis has been running for some time and
the conditions for the Dryer Notification are met. Below is an example of what your emails will look like with the link to the PI Vision page:

56 | P a g e

6. Summary
6.1

Revisit Learning Objectives

Thank you for completing this lab with us! In this lab we:
•

Explored features of several OSIsoft products in one lab.

•

Learned how to interact with the PI System.

•

Discovered how its features can work in concert to take an improvement idea
and impact an actual operating problem.

•

Transitioned PI Users into PI Power Users, enabling them to make a larger
contribution in addressing process problems based on an improved
understating of available tools and their domain expertise.

57 | P a g e

7. Appendix
7.1

Predictive Model Development and Variable Selection

There is a hidden sheet in the ‘PI World Dryer Regen Duration.xlsx’ Excel file on
the lab VM desktop that has been built out for you. If you right click on the sheet
ribbon and click Unhide > ‘Regen Variables’ you will be able to see this sheet. This
sheet plots event frame duration (or the Regeneration cycle duration) as a function of
key variables.
The purpose of this sheet is to identify an appropriate variable to use that will be a
good predictor of the time it takes the dryer to regenerate. The variables we have
are:
•

Average Regen Temp (the average temperature of the dryer throughout the
regeneration phase)

•

Regen Vapor Flow (the total flow of regeneration vapor throughout the
regeneration phase)

•

Drying Cycle Duration (the duration of the drying phase preceding the
regeneration phase)

•

Drying Cycle Barrels (the amount of barrels processed during the drying
phase preceding the regeneration phase)

Avg Regen Temp and Regen Vapor Flow appear to be good indicators of Regen
Duration – meaning there definitely appears to be a correlation between these
58 | P a g e

variables and the regeneration duration. Would these variables be a good choice for
predicting the regeneration time?
The answer is of course, no. The reason being is that these variables are collected
during the regeneration phase itself, and thus cannot be used to predict the duration
of the regeneration phase. This is important to know for this analytics project and this
lesson can be taken to other analytics projects as well.

💡
Tip

Having the domain knowledge on the process to know
which variables are appropriate to use for modeling and
forecasting is extremely important.
A common story we hear from analytics and data science
projects is that the end results often propose “obvious”
answers or suggestions. This highlights the importance of
working with, or including Subject Matter Experts
throughout the course of your analytics projects.

So that leaves us with two variables: Drying Cycle Duration and Drying Cycle
Barrels. Drying Cycle Duration seems like a potentially good candidate, however the
drawback with simply using duration as our predictor is that the flow or the speed of
the barrels processed during the drying phase is extremely variable and unknown.
For example, one drying phase might have a shorter duration but process more feed
because of a higher flow than another drying phase. Given that knowledge, the
Drying Cycle Barrels is the best option we have to use as a variable for our
predictive model for regeneration duration.

59 | P a g e

60 | P a g e

Save the Date!
OSIsoft PI World Users Conference in Amsterdam; October 26-29, 2020.
Register your interest now to receive updates and notification early bird registration opening.
https://pages.osisoft.com/UC-EMEA-2020-Q4-10-26-PI-World-AMS-Register-YourInterest_Register-Your-Interest.html

PI SYSTEM LEARNING
CONTINUE YOUR PI SYSTEM LEARNING
After the conference, the PI SYSTEM LEARNING
does not have to stop. All registered attendees for PI
World SFO 2020 will have access to all PI World
Hands-on Lab cloud environments for 21 days using
the discount cod below. You will receive detailed
instructions via email after the conference.

Discount Code: 2020PIWSF-LAB-100
Offer expires July 3, 2020

61 | P a g e

